---
layout: post
title: Big Brother
comments: true
---

I wonder if any of you remember Conservative promises to <a href="http://www.conservatives.com/News/News_stories/2009/09/Reversing_the_rise_of_the_surveillance_state.aspx">&#8216;reverse the rise of the surveillance state&#8217;</a> in the run-up to the last general election? It was all very noble, and one of the very limited number of Tory policies that I found myself agreeing with. After all, as the Tories themselves pointed out, the Labour government had all gone a bit &#8216;big brother&#8217;. Tory Dominic Grieve said &#8220;This Government’s approach to our personal privacy is the worst of all worlds – intrusive, ineffective and enormously expensive.&#8221;  It seemed that should the Tories gain power, they would do something about it. A small consolation.

Needless to say, given how pretty much everything else promised by the coalition parties before the election turned out, I don&#8217;t think anyone was entirely surprised this Sunday when the government announced plans to <a href="http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-politics-17576745">monitor emails, Web sites visited, phone calls</a>, and pretty much everything else you might choose to do on the Internet or your phone.

I cannot emphasise strongly enough just how illiberal this is, and just how much it should anger you. The proposed changes would allow the government &#8220;to identify who an individual or group is in contact with, how often and for how long. They would also be able to see which websites someone had visited.&#8221; Sure, they might not be able to actually read your emails or texts without a warrant, but how important is that, really? I&#8217;m sure there are many people who might not want their browsing history to be public &#8211; the text of the pages themselves is rather secondary. And these things are available without a warrant, i.e. the government &#8211; any bit of it &#8211; will be able to just have a look at what you&#8217;re up to without having to actually suspect you of anything at all or justify why they&#8217;re doing it.

Now, I&#8217;m sure we&#8217;ll be told there will be &#8216;safeguards&#8217; and &#8216;controls&#8217;, but isn&#8217;t that what the requirement for warrants are? If the government really thinks you might be a terrorist I don&#8217;t think they&#8217;re going to have a problem obtaining a warrant. No, these laws aren&#8217;t necessary to fight terrorism. We already have some of the most draconian &#8216;anti-terror&#8217; laws in Europe &#8211; the UK is the only European nation to have suspended article five of the European Convention on Human Rights which prevents arbitrary detention without trial, after all. And let&#8217;s face it, if the government can get away with locking random people up at-will without any evidence of wrong-doing, they&#8217;re not going to worry too much about keeping tabs on who we&#8217;re all talking to, especially when they won&#8217;t have to pay to do it (we all will, as ISPs and phone companies will have to collect the data for them).

The more technologically aware might think &#8217;that&#8217;s fine, I&#8217;ll just encrypt everything&#8217;. Well good luck with that. If you fail to hand-over decryption keys to the government when asked you&#8217;ll end-up with up to five years in prison, thanks to Part 3, Section 49 of the Regulation of Investigatory Powers Act. Remember, you don&#8217;t have to be under suspicion of anything at all. While <span class="caps">RIPA</span> isn&#8217;t new, the ability of the state to snoop on your Internet traffic at will, without reason, is. When they do that and notice encrypted traffic, what then? Well, &#8216;no smoke without fire&#8217; might think PC Plod, and ask for your encryption keys. Bad luck if you&#8217;ve forgotten them &#8211; <span class="caps">RIPA</span> means it&#8217;s your job not to, or it&#8217;s five years in prison for you!

But let&#8217;s not get ahead of ourselves here. Why should we even worry about encryption keys, which Web sites we visit, who we&#8217;ve phoned, or any of this? It is no business of the state. I feel as strongly about this as I do about people who think it&#8217;s weird not to tell police my name or what I&#8217;m doing (note: don&#8217;t be rude, just politely refuse to tell them). If I am not committing a crime then it is <em>no business</em> of the police who I am or what I&#8217;m doing. They are here to serve us and we are not living in a police state &#8211; yet. It is a very sad thing that there are some who think it&#8217;s reasonable that the police (or government in general) should have a right to know every aspect of our lives. These people do not deserve the liberty that they are so willing to make the rest of us give up.

