---
layout: post
title: Data Regulation and Investigatory Powers Bill
description: "Data Regulation and Investigatory Powers Bill"
modified: 2014-07-19
category: articles
tags: [politics,legislation]
comments: true
share: true
---

A few days ago the Commons passed the Data Regulation and Investigatory Powers Bill (DRIP). I wrote the
following letter to the Bath Chronicle:

On the 15th of July the House of Commons passed the Data Regulation
and Investigatory Powers (DRIP) bill. This was after being given just
a day to debate the far reaching and deeply illiberal powers granted
to security services to continue dredging the private communications
data of millions of completely innocent people.

The European Court of Justice deemed previous retention of innocent
people's data to be illegal, but despite the government having since
April to write new laws they have forced it through in a day, without
time for proper debate. The new bill extends the previous powers
beyond those sought under the Draft Communications Data Bill (the
‘Snooper’s Charter’).

Our MP Don Foster voted for this massive and unwarranted invasion into
our privacy. In fact all three main parties support this bill. The
Green Party is only party which stands representatives in English
constituencies to vote against.

The 'liberal' Democrats and other parties are happy to live in a
country where nothing is private. I and the Green Party believe that
the State has no business spying on people who are not under suspicion
of any crime.

Dominic Tristram,
Green Party Prospective Parliamentary Candidate for Bath

