---
layout: post
title: The Tragic Consequences of Profit in Healthcare - More Lessons from the U.S.
category: soapbox
tags: [politics]
comments: true
share: true
---

<img src="../../../assets/img/2024/brian_thompson.png">

<em>US healthcare results in inequality and bankruptcy, but when limited to everyday
people it doesn't often make the news. The death of a wealthy CEO might finally get the
attention of those in power.</em>

On the 4th of December news emerged of the assassination of healthcare CEO Brian Thompson
in the United States. While details are still unfolding (the current leading suspect Luigi
Mangione claims to be innocent), the incident raises broader issues about the role of
profit-driven healthcare systems and the dangers they pose.

<b>Disparities in Attention</b>

The first striking observation is the disproportionate media attention given to this case.
Murders occur daily in America, often involving firearms, yet the killing of a wealthy
individual garners significantly more coverage than the countless lives lost among
ordinary citizens. This disparity reflects a broader societal tendency to prioritise the
wealthy and influential, but it also serves as a stark reminder of the systemic
inequalities at play.

I want to make it clear that I celebrate no deaths, including this one. I hate the way the
US healthcare system is, and I think it’s immoral for people to become as rich as this man
was on the back of it, but I will not condone those celebrating this as some sort of
‘payback’.

What is true is that the murder of someone very wealthy has reminded everyone of the
obvious truth behind the industry that made him wealthy, and indeed the whole concept of
private healthcare: the incentive to profit by spending as little money as possible on
treatment while charging as much as you can get away with.

<b>The Suspect and His Motives</b>

What makes this case unusual is the profile of the suspect. By all accounts, he is
wealthy, well-educated, and had no prior criminal record or history of violence. He
attended the University of Pennsylvania, an Ivy League university, earning both a degree
and a master’s in computer science—hardly the typical background of someone who would
commit such an act.

Friends of Mangione suggest he suffered a debilitating back injury from a surfing accident
and endured chronic pain despite undergoing multiple treatments. Despite his wealth and
insurance coverage, he allegedly faced repeated denials of certain treatments by his
insurer, who deemed them unnecessary. These frustrations may have led him to target the
CEO of the insurance company, an individual who had profited significantly from a system
that, to the suspect, denied him care.

It’s critical to state unequivocally that I believe that violence is never a solution to a
non-violent problem. However, understanding the conditions that drive someone to such
desperation is essential. The suspect appears to have meticulously planned the attack,
isolating himself for months before targeting the CEO—a calculated act rooted in personal
grievance rather than random violence.

<b>The Inevitable Outcome of Profit-Driven Healthcare</b>

This case highlights the perils of introducing profit motives into healthcare. In systems
where financial gain becomes a priority, insurers and providers often save money by
denying treatments, regardless of the impact on patients. For every pound saved, an
additional pound is pocketed by executives and shareholders. This dynamic breeds
resentment, particularly when patients feel abandoned by a system that prioritises profit
over care.

And yet, we are told by this Labour government, and many UK governments before it, that
involving private healthcare in the NHS is somehow necessary because the NHS is ‘broken’
or ‘not fit for purpose’. This is a lie and must be called out.

The UK’s NHS, while far from perfect, historically stood as a model of efficiency and
equity. Until 2011, it was widely recognised as one of the most efficient healthcare
systems in the world, delivering strong outcomes for relatively low expenditure.

<img src="../../../assets/img/2024/nhs_ranking_2011.jpg">

However, the introduction of private sector involvement under successive Conservative and
Liberal Democrat governments has fundamentally altered its landscape. Waiting lists have
soared, A&E targets are missed, and patients struggle to see GPs—all symptoms of a system
weakened by reforms that prioritise cost-cutting over care.

<b>The Danger of Following America’s Lead</b>

Disturbingly, Labour’s current health proposals seem poised to deepen this trend. Figures
such as Health secretary Wes Streeting advocate for increased private sector involvement
in the NHS, bringing in consultants and advisors to implement “efficiency” measures. But
let’s be clear: the private sector’s primary goal is not to improve healthcare—it is to
make money. Every pound saved by denying care or cutting corners flows into the pockets of
CEOs and shareholders.

This profit-driven model inevitably creates winners and losers. The winners are the
corporations and the ultra-wealthy, who profit from extracting money from healthcare
systems. The losers are patients denied timely, effective care. The U.S. offers a grim
warning: a system where wealth dictates access to healthcare creates desperation, and
desperation breeds violence.

<b>A Crossroads for the NHS</b>

The UK now faces a choice. Do we continue down the road of increasing private sector
involvement, accepting that this will likely exacerbate inequality and reduce access to
care? Or do we return to a model that prioritises public investment in the NHS, ensuring
healthcare remains a right, not a privilege?

Desperate people will resort to desperate measures. While the violence seen in the U.S. is
extreme, it serves as a cautionary tale. By allowing profit motives to dictate healthcare
policy, we risk creating a society where people are pushed to their limits—financially,
emotionally, and physically. The solution is not more private sector involvement but less.

We must resist efforts to privatise further and instead invest in a truly public NHS. This
is not just about preserving healthcare; it’s about preventing a future where desperation
turns into tragedy.

<a href="https://weownit.org.uk/act-now/tell-wes-streeting-no-new-pfi-our-nhs">There
happens to be a petition by We Own It running right now</a> asking Wes Streeting not to
make new PFI deals. This is just a part of his agenda to siphon more NHS money, our money,
off to the private health sector. I urge you to sign it and share it.

<div class="substack-post-embed"><p lang="en">The Tragic Consequences of Profit in Healthcare: More Lessons from the U.S. by Dom Tristram</p><p>US healthcare results in inequality and bankruptcy, but when limited to everyday people it doesn't often make the news. The death of a wealthy CEO might finally get the attention of those in power.</p><a data-post-link href="https://domtristram.substack.com/p/the-tragic-consequences-of-profit">Read on Substack</a></div><script async src="https://substack.com/embedjs/embed.js" charset="utf-8"></script>
