---
layout: post
title: Spotify Wrapped
category: music
tags: [music]
comments: true
share: true
---

<b>Why I wont be sharing my 'Spotify Wrapped'</b>

Every year, around this time, countless artists eagerly share their Spotify Wrapped stats
with the world. Let me be clear from the start: I don’t begrudge anyone doing so. If an
artist is proud of what they’ve achieved, more power to them. This isn’t an article
criticising their choice to celebrate their milestones. Rather, it’s about why I’ve chosen
not to participate.

<b>It’s Not About Hiding Anything</b>

I’m not shying away because I’ve got something to hide. I’m perfectly open about the fact
that my music reaches a modest audience. In fact, this year, I’ve gained more listeners
than ever, and I’m pleased with that. But I’m still operating on a small scale. My
reluctance to share my stats doesn’t stem from embarrassment or a desire to obscure my
standing. Instead, it’s about something deeper: the toxic culture that surrounds these
numbers.

<b>The Problem With Spotify’s Numbers</b>

I’ve always had a problem with Spotify prominently displaying an artist’s monthly listener
count on their profile. This feature fosters an unhealthy obsession with numbers. It
drives behaviours like playlist botting and paid promotions to artificially inflate stats
because, like it or not, those figures influence how listeners perceive music.

The logic is flawed, but it exists nonetheless: low numbers equate to low quality in the
eyes of some. This system discourages genuine discovery of lesser-known artists. On other
streaming platforms, where such statistics aren’t front and centre, listeners are arguably
more inclined to give unfamiliar music a chance. That’s real discovery—finding artists who
are talented but not yet well-known.

Spotify, however, perpetuates a cycle of promoting the already popular. Even the
platform’s much-touted discovery features, like its recommendations, often lead to artists
who are already well-established. After one of my songs finishes playing, the next
recommendation is almost always someone with hundreds of thousands of listeners—artists I
already know. That’s not discovery; it’s recycling. What about the smaller, independent
artists who deserve a shot?

<b>The Broader Implications for Artists</b>

This obsession with numbers has practical consequences too. Venues and promoters
increasingly use Spotify stats to determine whether an artist is worth booking. They’ll
often check monthly listener counts as part of their decision-making process. For many
smaller musicians, this makes Spotify an inescapable part of their career, even if they’d
rather direct listeners to platforms like Bandcamp or Tidal, which pay far better
royalties.

Spotify has us hooked, and they know it. Their dominance ensures that artists feel
compelled to drive traffic to the platform, even if it’s not in their best interest. I’m
guilty of it myself. When I release a song, I post a Spotify link because I want those
numbers to climb. I resent doing it, but the ecosystem leaves me little choice.

<b>Why I’m Opting Out of Spotify Wrapped</b>

This brings me to Spotify Wrapped, the culmination of this numbers-driven culture. Every
year, artists and listeners alike are encouraged to share their stats as a badge of
honour. It’s become a normalised ritual, but it’s ultimately just another way Spotify
reinforces the importance of these numbers.

As an artist, I can see my stats anytime. They’re useful for marketing, understanding my
audience, and planning my next moves. But making these numbers public doesn’t benefit
me—or most artists. Unless you’re a massive name, your numbers will always pale in
comparison to someone else’s. It’s a game that smaller artists can’t win.

<b>A Call for Change</b>

Instead of feeding this toxic system, I propose we do better. Let’s stop amplifying
Spotify’s advertising under the guise of Wrapped. Let’s question why we’re promoting a
platform that pays Joe Rogan hundreds of millions while underpaying independent artists.
Let’s push for platforms that treat musicians more fairly and genuinely support discovery
of new talent.

I’m not suggesting that Spotify has no place in the music industry, but its current model
doesn’t serve smaller artists. Wrapped is a celebration of numbers, not music. So this
year, I’m choosing to step back. My voice may be small, but it’s one I’ll use to advocate
for something better—something that values artistry over algorithms.

<div class="substack-post-embed"><p lang="en">Spotify Wrapped by Dom Tristram</p><p>Why I wont be sharing my 'Spotify Wrapped'</p><a data-post-link href="https://domtristrammusic.substack.com/p/spotify-wrapped">Read on Substack</a></div><script async src="https://substack.com/embedjs/embed.js" charset="utf-8"></script>


<em>To receive my new politics posts directly by email or in the Substack app,
please <a href="https://domtristrammusic.substack.com/">subscribe</a></em>
