---
layout: post
title: Labour Government Paves the Way for Large Scale NHS Privatisation
category: soapbox
tags: [politics, healthcare, NHS, privatisation, Labour]
comments: true
share: true
---

<div class="substack-post-embed"><p lang="en">Labour Government Paves the Way for Large Scale NHS Privatisation: A Critical Look at Increased Private Healthcare Use by Dom Tristram</p><p>Government's 6th January announcement reignites concerns about the creeping privatisation of the NHS</p><a data-post-link href="https://domtristram.substack.com/p/labour-government-paves-the-way-for">Read on Substack</a></div><script async src="https://substack.com/embedjs/embed.js" charset="utf-8"></script>

Yesterday (6th January 2025) the Labour government announced of a significant increase in
the use of private healthcare providers to address NHS waiting lists. While some may argue
this is a pragmatic response to backlogs, the implications of this policy confirm a
deeper, more troubling shift.

<b>A Pattern of Privatisation</b>

I have long pointed to the Labour Party’s pro-privatisation stance, but this warning has
all too often fallen on deaf ears, both of Labour activists and some voters. I can’t tell
you how many times I have been at hustings or meetings about the NHS where people simply
don’t believe that Labour, the self-styled ‘party of the NHS’ has anything but the best of
intentions for it and keeping it public.

However, this is not the case. Even under Corbyn (who supported the Bill as a back
bencher) the Labour Party was whipped to abstain on the NHS Reinstatement Bill, which
would have put removing profits from NHS service into law.

Wes Streeting, the Shadow Health Secretary, has consistently shown sympathy towards
private healthcare, and the Labour Party has received sizeable donations from private
health companies. Yesterday’s announcement underscores a fundamental issue: the NHS is
being incrementally handed over to private firms, under the guise of efficiency and
backlog reduction.

This is not a short-term solution. Once private providers become even more entrenched in
NHS operations, they are unlikely to leave. NHS money—already stretched to its limit—is
being funnelled into private pockets, with no new funding in sight. For those who argue
that private providers will simply vanish once waiting lists are cleared, the reality is
far from it. Their presence will likely expand, creating a system where profit motives
increasingly dictate healthcare provision.

<b>The Staff Shortage Problem</b>

One of the key flaws in this approach is the misconception that private hospitals can
offer additional capacity. Private healthcare providers do not conjure up new staff; they
largely rely on NHS-trained consultants, many of whom divide their time between public and
private work. As private workloads increase, NHS capacity inevitably suffers. The problem
isn’t a lack of facilities but a chronic shortage of staff—a situation exacerbated by
diverting personnel to more lucrative private roles.

<b>Skimming Profits from Routine Procedures</b>

Even if we were to assume that private healthcare provides genuine extra capacity, this
policy creates another financial burden for the NHS. Private providers typically focus on
straightforward, high-volume procedures like hip and knee replacements—the very services
where NHS hospitals can generate a modest surplus to offset the losses from more complex
and costly treatments, such as emergency care or cancer therapies.

By outsourcing routine operations, the NHS loses this vital revenue stream, making it even
harder to sustain essential but less ‘profitable’ services. The result? NHS hospitals will
struggle even more, while private firms profit.

<b>Shiny Private Facilities vs. Crumbling NHS Infrastructure</b>

It’s easy to see why patients might prefer private hospitals, with their modern
facilities. But this shouldn’t be a choice forced upon them due to the government’s
neglect of NHS infrastructure.

My partner works in a typical, tired and crumbling NHS hospital where wards are sometimes
closed because of plumbing disasters—a problem that could easily be resolved with proper
investment in capital projects. Yet, funding for such improvements is sorely lacking.

Instead of funnelling money into private hospitals, the government should be investing in
NHS facilities, expanding capacity, and addressing the maintenance backlog. Shiny private
hospitals might appear appealing in the short term, but they represent a long-term erosion
of the NHS’s ability to provide universal, equitable care.

<b>A Solution: Nationalise Private Hospitals</b>

The Labour government claims there is no alternative to private sector involvement, but
history tells us otherwise. When the NHS was founded, private hospitals were brought into
public ownership to ensure universal healthcare. If we truly want to expand NHS capacity,
the solution is simple: nationalise private hospitals and integrate them into the public
healthcare system.

This approach would immediately bolster NHS capacity without diverting funds to
profit-driven providers. Anything less is a tacit admission that the government
prioritises private profit over public health.

<b>What Can You Do?</b>

To combat this privatisation agenda, take action now. Write to your Labour MP or local
Labour Party and express your opposition to private sector outsourcing. Make it clear that
their stance on this issue will influence your vote. Even if you’ve never voted Labour,
they won’t know—what matters is the pressure from constituents.

Additionally, consider supporting a party that unequivocally opposes NHS privatisation. As
a former Green Party candidate, I believe the Greens are the only party in England
committed to removing private firms from the NHS and restoring it as a public service.

Your vote is your voice—use it to demand a healthcare system that prioritises people over
profit.

The future of the NHS depends on our collective action. If we fail to stand against these
policies now, privatisation will continue, and the core principles of our healthcare
system will be eroded beyond recognition.

Vote for what you believe in, and fight for a truly public NHS.

